---
layout: page
active: details
description: pawsnet &rdquo; details &rdquo; problem
---

# Problem Statement

Digital inclusion is important for social equality to ensure access to the many benefits the Internet offers. These benefits include access to support services and information, cheaper goods, and online communities; and as novel services continue to become available (i.e. the Internet of Things) the consequences of exclusion will continue to grow. The digitally excluded are often elderly, socially excluded, and/or economically deprived. These individuals commonly have low levels of physical mobility (e.g. lack a car) and high levels of reliance on support services, and so have a great deal to gain from Internet access. At the societal level, aside from issues of social justice and equality, the consequences of digital exclusion are economically inefficient offline access to services and a reduction in participation in the Digital Economy (DE).

Whilst amongst the elderly the primary exclusionary factor is cultural (commonly that they do not perceive value in it), amongst younger demographics who want to be online, affordability is cited as the primary barrier, explicitly so by over 40% of digitally excluded 16-44 year olds. The UK Government’s current efforts to address digital inclusion have focused primarily on allocation of £530m to subsidise industry deployment of both ‘superfast’ broadband to urban areas, and ‘standard’ broadband to more remote locations. This approach is predicated on a desire to support novel DE services through improvements in speed for urban users, while simultaneously ensuring basic levels of access for all (e.g. access to critical services such as jobseekers, NHSonline websites etc which do not require high capacity broadband).
          
Crucially, this approach addresses infrastructural barriers without addressing economic ones. Pricing is left to the market. However we believe that leaving connectivity for all to be governed by market economics is a major impediment to achieving the full benefits of a DE, and that basic Internet access should be made freely available to all due to its societal benefits, a sentiment recently expressed by Berners-Lee. Many individuals find themselves unable to afford broadband access, unable to pass a necessary credit check, or living in circumstances that are too unstable to commit to lengthy broadband contracts. Indeed, Internet services are increasingly accessed on the move and so current models of “roaming” access provision drive this economic exclusion to a new level, not currently addressed by the push to deploy broadband.
          
Although there is no single ‘magic bullet’ to remove socio-economic barriers, there are infrastructural solutions that could drastically reduce them. The Public Access WiFi Service (PAWS) project is a first step in this direction: a feasibility study to establish technical requirements and identify the current practices and needs of the digitally excluded. Following successful demonstration, we hope that government policy can be nudged to support industry uptake leading to national deployment.
